README.md, before:

# OtterGB

README for OtterGB
Last updated April 6th, 2021

## About

OtterGB is a cross-platform Gameboy and Gameboy Color emulator written entirely
in C++. It is completely open source. Feel free to distribute, fork, and modify
the code in any way you want. All I ask that you include a link back here.

Author: [Cory Thornsberry](https://github.com/cthornsb)

Email: <desertedotter@gmail.com>

Repository: <https://github.com/cthornsb/OtterGB>

## Acknowledgements

OtterGB would not be possible without the following resources:

### Graphics and Audio Libraries

[OpenGL](https://www.opengl.org/)

[OpenGL Extension Wrangler (GLEW)](http://glew.sourceforge.net) or on [github](https://github.com/nigels-com/glew)

[Graphics Library Framework (GLFW)](https://www.glfw.org) or on [github](https://github.com/glfw/glfw)

[Simple OpenGL Image Library (SOIL)](https://github.com/paralin/soil)

[PortAudio](http://www.portaudio.com) or on [github](https://github.com/PortAudio/portaudio)

### Documentation

[Pan Docs](https://gbdev.io/pandocs/)

[The GBDev Wiki](https://gbdev.gg8.se/wiki/articles/Main_Page)

[Gameboy CPU (LR35902) instruction set](https://www.pastraiser.com/cpu/gameboy/gameboy_opcodes.html)

[Blargg's test ROMs](https://gbdev.gg8.se/wiki/articles/Test_ROMs)

## Building and Installing

OtterGB requires audio and graphical classes from *[OtterEngine](https://github.com/cthornsb/OtterEngine)*.
Follow the instructions in the OtterEngine README to install the headers and libraries
we will need for OtterGB.

### Linux (Ubuntu)

Compiling on Linux is relatively easy. Once you have installed all the pre-requisite
packages, build OtterGB using:

```bash
    git clone https://github.com/cthornsb/OtterGB
    cd OtterGB
    mkdir build
    cd build
    cmake -DOTTER_DIRECTORY="/path/to/OtterEngine" ..
```

We set the CMake variable **OTTER_DIRECTORY** which allows CMake to load the required
environment scripts OtterGB needs in order to build. And that should be all we
need. If all goes well and CMake completes successfully, type:

```bash
    make install
```

To build and install OtterGB. The default binary install directory is `OtterGB/install/bin`, 
this is where the *ottergb* executable is located.

### Windows

Using Visual Studio, clone the *[OtterGB](https://github.com/cthornsb/OtterGB)* repository
and open it. Generate the default CMakeCache and open the CMake settings. In the field
*CMake command arguments:*, input the following:

```bash
    -DOTTER_DIRECTORY="/path/to/OtterEngine"
```

We set the CMake variable **OTTER_DIRECTORY** which allows CMake to load the required
environment scripts OtterGB needs in order to build. And that should be all we
need. 

Save the CMake settings and hopefully CMake will complete successfully. Once this is
done, build the project by clicking `Build->Build All` followed by `Build->Install OtterEngine` 
to install the executable to the install directory (`OtterEngine/out/install/` by default).

### Additional Build Options

| Option           | Default | Description |
|------------------|---------|-------------|
| CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE | Release | CMake build type: None Debug Release RelWithDebInfo MinSizeRel |
| INSTALL_DIR      |         | Install Prefix                                                 |
| BUILD_TOOLS      | OFF     | Build and install emulator tools                               |
| ENABLE_AUDIO     | ON      | Build with support for audio output (Requires PortAudio)       |
| ENABLE_DEBUGGER  | OFF     | Build with support for gui debugger (Requires QT4)             |
| INSTALL_DLLS     | ON      | (Windows only) Copy required DLLs when installing executable   |

Emulation of the LR35902 CPU is fairly CPU intensive. Unless you have a beefy
PC, using a build type of *Debug* will probably result in emulation framerates
that are too slow to use. If you absolutely need debug symbols, *RelWithDebInfo*
typically works at the same speed as *Release*.

## Getting started

To run OtterGB simply run the executable. The Windows version does not support 
command line options but will instead load a config file named `default.cfg` which
must be placed in the same directory as the executable. The config file contains
many different emulator options that you can use to tweak performance. Linux builds
may also use config files, but they are not loaded unless you specify the -c flag
from the command line.

The most important variables in the config file are **ROM_DIRECTORY** and **ROM_FILENAME**.

**ROM_DIRECTORY** is used to specify the directory where your ROM files are placed. It may
be a relative path or an absolute path but it is required. If the ROMs are in the 
same directory as the executable just leave it as `.` or `./`

**ROM_FILENAME** specifies the file to load on boot, but you can switch it in the emulator 
console (press \` and then type `file <filename>`) or drag and drop a DMG or CGB file 
onto the emulator window to load it. If **ROM_FILENAME** is not specified or if OtterGB
fails to load the file, the emulator will boot to the OtterGB console. See the 
[OtterGB Console](#ottergb-console-and-lr35902-interpreter) section below for more information.

All possible emulator options are listed in `default.cfg`, but more may be added
in the future.

### Windows builds

I get very inconsistent framerates on Windows. It seems a lot harder to do high-res
frame timing on Windows than it is on Linux (for C++ at least), although this probably
varies by machine. The framerate is even more unstable when using VSync in windowed
mode, although it works perfectly in fullscreen mode F11 and on Linux.

I think the reason for this is that high-res timing system calls take much longer on
Windows than they do on Linux for whatever reason. To alleviate this somewhat, The 
config file option **FRAME_TIME_OFFSET** may be used to tweak fps performance by modifying 
the frame timing on the microsecond level. I find an offset of around *900 us* works well 
on my PC, but you can try adjusting the offset to get framerates closer to 60. Positive
offset values will **INCREASE** the framerate while negative values will **DECREASE** it if
the emulator is running too fast.

VSync is off by default (for the reasons above), but you may enable it by changing
**VSYNC_ENABLED** to *true* in the config file or by using the emulator console (press 
the ` key and type `vsync`) while the emulator is running. See the 
[OtterGB Console](#ottergb-console-and-lr35902-interpreter) section below.

### Linux builds

On linux there are several command line options

| Option              | Args           | Description                                                |
|:--------------------|:--------------:|:-----------------------------------------------------------|
| --help (-h)         |                | Print command syntax                                       |
| --config (-c)       | `<filename>`   | Specify an input configuration file                        |
| --input (-i)        | `<filename>`   | Specify an input ROM file                                  |
| --framerate (-F)    | `<fps>`        | Set target framerate (default=59.73)                       |
| --volume (-V)       | `<volume>`     | Set initial output volume (in range 0 to 1)                |
| --verbose (-v)      |                | Toggle verbose output mode                                 |
| --palette (-p)      | `<palette>`    | Set palette number for DMG games (base 16)                 |
| --scale-factor (-S) | `<N>`          | Set the integer size multiplier for the screen (default 2) |
| --force-color (-C)  |                | Use CGB mode for original DMG games                        |
| --no-load-sram (-n) |                | Do not load external cartridge RAM (SRAM) at boot          |
| --debug (-d)        |                | Enable debugging support                                   |
| --tile-viewer (-T)  |                | Enable VRAM tile viewer (if debug gui enabled)             |
| --layer-viewer (-L) |                | Enable BG/WIN layer viewer (if debug gui enabled)          |

The -c flag allows the use of a config file just as is used for Windows, but many
config file options are duplicated with command line options and the command flags
take priority.

If a config file is not used (with the -c flag), the input filename MUST be
specified, other the program will exit immediately.

### Using bootstrap ROMs

OtterGB supports custom bootstrap ROMs on startup. Bootstraps have a maximum 
length of 16 kB and must contain compiled LR35902 code. They must also contain 
no vital code between addresses 0x100 and 0x200 (byte numbers 256 to 512) because
the cartridge ROM header needs to be visible to the emulator. Bootstrap program
entry point must be byte 0, although you could use a `JP` at byte 0 to jump to the
start of the program.

By default, bootstrap programs are expected to exist in a subdirectory named 
`./bootstraps/` which must be placed in the same directory as the executable in
order to function. The expected filenames for the DMG and CGB bootstrap ROMs
are `dmg_boot.bin` and `cgb_boot.bin` respectively. If OtterGB fails to locate
the bootstrap ROMs, it will simply ignore them and start the input ROM immediately.

The standard DMG and CGB bootstrap ROMs are not included with OtterGB because
they contain potentially copyrighted material, but you can find them online.

## Running ROMs

While the emulator is running, press ESC to exit and press F1 for default button
mapping. Default game controls are shown below, but they may be changed using the
config file.

### DMG / CGB button inputs:

| Button | Keyboard Key |
|-------:|:-------------|
|  Start | Enter        |
| Select | Tab          |
|      B | j            |
|      A | k            |
|     Up | w (up)       |
|   Down | s (down)     |
|   Left | a (left)     |
|  Right | d (right)    |

### System functions:

| Key | Function |
|----:|:---------|
| F1  | Display help screen |
| F2  | Pause emulation     |
| F3  | Resume emulation    |
| F4  | Reset emulator      |
| F5  | Quicksave state     |
| F6  | Decrease frame-skip (higher CPU usage) |
| F7  | Increase frame-skip (lower CPU usage)  |
| F8  | Save cart SRAM to `sram.dat`        |
| F9  | Quickload state                     |
| F10 | Start/stop midi recording `out.mid` |
| F11 | Enable/disable full screen mode |
| F12 | Take screenshot                 |
| \`  | Open interpreter console        |
| -   | Decrease volume                 |
| +   | Increase volume                 |
| c   | Change currently active gamepad |
| f   | Show/hide FPS counter on screen |
| m   | Mute output audio               |

### Controller support

OtterGB supports 360-style and PS-style controllers. Simply plug in a controller
and start using it using the default mapping below (bindings may be changed using
the config file).

| Button | Controller Button |
|-------:|:------------------|
| Start  | Start             |
| Select | Back              |
|      B | A (or X)          |
|      A | B (or O)          |
|     Up | DPad up           |
|   Down | DPad down         |
|   Left | DPad left         |
|  Right | DPad right        |

Press [GUIDE/HOME] to pause emulation (does not work on all platforms because some
bind the guide button to an on-screen menu e.g. Windows).

### Fullscreen and windowed modes

Upon booting, OtterGB starts in windowed mode. The window may be resized to any size
you wish. Pillarboxing or letterboxing will be added for windows with an aspect ratio
that does not match that of the DMG / CGB (1.111). Pillar[letter]boxing may be 
disabled by setting **UNLOCK_ASPECT_RATIO** to *true*.

OtterGB will automatically pause emulation whenever the window loses focus, and will
resume emulation when it regains focus.

To switch to fullscreen mode, press F11 at any time. VSync is automatically enabled
when in fullscreen mode, regardless of previous settings, but you may disable it from
the [console](#ottergb-console-and-lr35902-interpreter). Pressing F11 again will return 
to windowed mode.

### Save RAM

OtterGB supports saving and loading of cartridge save ram (SRAM) for ROMs which
support this feature. By default, SRAM is loaded automatically when the ROM is
loaded (using the filename of the ROM, if it exists) and it is saved automatically 
when the emulator is closed. If the emulator crashes, SRAM may not save successfully.
To avoid potential loss of save data, SRAM may be saved at any time by pressing F8.

### Savestates

Savestates are supported by OtterGB, but are currently still in development and may
be buggy. They are not guaranteed to work properly and their format is subject to 
change in future updates. Pressing F5 will save the current emulator state and 
pressing F9 will load the saved state. This feature usually works, but sometimes 
the emulator will hang and will need to be reset by pressing F4.

### Screenshots

Screenshots may be saved at any time by pressing F12. Screenshots will be saved
in the same directory as the executable and will have the game title, the date,
and the time in the filename. Currently only BMP output is supported, but this
will be changed to PNG in the future.

### Midi output

OtterGB supports recording midi files. Press F10 while the emulator is running
to start a midi recording and then press F10 again to finalize the output midi
file. Currently, midi files will always have the name 'out.mid' so be sure to
back up midi files if you plan to record more than one.

Midi file recording works fairly well, but may not produce pleasant sounding
midi files if the ROM being recorded makes heavy use of the frequency sweep on
channel 1 or if it changes note frequency very rapidly.

## OtterGB console and LR35902 interpreter

OtterGB contains a built in console and LR35902 interpreter. To enable the console,
press \` at any time while the emulator is running. The console supports many
built-in commands as well as allowing direct read/write access to all CPU registers,
system registers, and all 64 kB of system memory.

All CPU and system registers may be used by name in mathematical expressions. The 8
8-bit LR35902 CPU registers are *a*, *b*, *c*, *d*, *e*, *f*, *h*, and *l*. The 6 16-bit 
registers are *ab*, *cd*, *ef*, *hl*, *sp*, and *pc* (*sp* and *pc* are the stack pointer 
and program counter respectively). System registers are 8-bit values and may be used by 
their standardized names (e.g. *LCDC*, *NR10*, etc; not case sensitive).

There are no sanity checks used in the console. You can read or write any register
or memory location you want. You can also do something stupid like change the program
counter or stack pointer, although these will almost certainly hang the current ROM.

If you crash the ROM while playing around you can reset it by typing *reset* in the
console or by pressing F4 outside the console.

The following built-in commands are available:

| Command       | Args           | Description          |
|:--------------|:--------------:|:---------------------|
| quit          |                | Exit emulator        |
| exit          |                | Exit emulator        |
| close         |                | Close console        |
| help          | [command]      | Print list of commands or syntax for *command* |
| about         |                | Print program information |
| a             | [value]        | Print or set *A* register |
| b             | [value]        | Print or set *B* register |
| c             | [value]        | Print or set *C* register |
| d             | [value]        | Print or set *D* register |
| e             | [value]        | Print or set *E* register |
| f             | [value]        | Print or set *F* register |
| h             | [value]        | Print or set *H* register |
| l             | [value]        | Print or set *L* register |
| d8            | [value]        | Print or set *d8* immediate |
| af            | [value]        | Print or set *AF* register |
| bc            | [value]        | Print or set *BC* register |
| de            | [value]        | Print or set *DE* register |
| hl            | [value]        | Print or set *HL* register |
| pc            | [value]        | Print or set program counter *PC* |
| sp            | [value]        | Print or set stack pointer *SP*   |
| d16           | [value]        | Print or set *d16* immediate      |
| inst          |                | Print most recent cpu instruction |
| read          | `<addr>`         | Read byte at address     |
| write         | `<addr> <value>` | Write byte to address    |
| rreg          | `<name>`         | Read system register     |
| wreg          | `<name> <value>` | Write system register    |
| hex           | `<value>`        | Convert value to hex     |
| bin           | `<value>`        | Convert value to binary  |
| dec           | `<value>`        | Convert value to decimal |
| cls           |                | Clear screen   |
| reset         |                | Reset emulator |
| qsave         | [filename]     | Quicksave      |
| qload         | [filename]     | Quickload      |
| dir           | [path]         | Set ROM directory (or print if no argument) |
| file          | [filename]     | Set ROM filename (or print if no argument)  |
| vsync         |                | Toggle VSync on or off                      |

Commit message:

Fixed exe path drop for files with no extension
Linux builds now use 'default.cfg' if started with no arguments, just like the Windows version.

Updated README for recent additions.

README.md, after:

# OtterGB

README for OtterGB
Last updated April 6th, 2021

## About

OtterGB is a cross-platform Gameboy and Gameboy Color emulator written entirely
in C++. It is completely open source. Feel free to distribute, fork, and modify
the code in any way you want. All I ask that you include a link back here.

Author: [Cory Thornsberry](https://github.com/cthornsb)

Email: <desertedotter@gmail.com>

Repository: <https://github.com/cthornsb/OtterGB>

## Acknowledgements

OtterGB would not be possible without the following resources:

### Graphics and Audio Libraries

[OpenGL](https://www.opengl.org/)

[OpenGL Extension Wrangler (GLEW)](http://glew.sourceforge.net) or on [github](https://github.com/nigels-com/glew)

[Graphics Library Framework (GLFW)](https://www.glfw.org) or on [github](https://github.com/glfw/glfw)

[Simple OpenGL Image Library (SOIL)](https://github.com/paralin/soil)

[PortAudio](http://www.portaudio.com) or on [github](https://github.com/PortAudio/portaudio)

### Documentation

[Pan Docs](https://gbdev.io/pandocs/)

[The GBDev Wiki](https://gbdev.gg8.se/wiki/articles/Main_Page)

[Gameboy CPU (LR35902) instruction set](https://www.pastraiser.com/cpu/gameboy/gameboy_opcodes.html)

[Blargg's test ROMs](https://gbdev.gg8.se/wiki/articles/Test_ROMs)

## Building and Installing

OtterGB requires audio and graphical classes from *[OtterEngine](https://github.com/cthornsb/OtterEngine)*.
Follow the instructions in the OtterEngine README to install the headers and libraries
we will need for OtterGB.

### Linux (Ubuntu)

Compiling on Linux is relatively easy. Once you have installed all the pre-requisite
packages, build OtterGB using:

```bash
    git clone https://github.com/cthornsb/OtterGB
    cd OtterGB
    mkdir build
    cd build
    cmake -DOTTER_DIRECTORY="/path/to/OtterEngine" ..
```

We set the CMake variable **OTTER_DIRECTORY** which allows CMake to load the required
environment scripts OtterGB needs in order to build. And that should be all we
need. If all goes well and CMake completes successfully, type:

```bash
    make install
```

To build and install OtterGB. The default binary install directory is `OtterGB/install/bin`, 
this is where the *ottergb* executable is located.

### Windows

Using Visual Studio, clone the *[OtterGB](https://github.com/cthornsb/OtterGB)* repository
and open it. Generate the default CMakeCache and open the CMake settings. In the field
*CMake command arguments:*, input the following:

```bash
    -DOTTER_DIRECTORY="/path/to/OtterEngine"
```

We set the CMake variable **OTTER_DIRECTORY** which allows CMake to load the required
environment scripts OtterGB needs in order to build. And that should be all we
need. 

Save the CMake settings and hopefully CMake will complete successfully. Once this is
done, build the project by clicking `Build->Build All` followed by `Build->Install OtterEngine` 
to install the executable to the install directory (`OtterEngine/out/install/` by default).

### Additional Build Options

| Option           | Default | Description |
|------------------|---------|-------------|
| CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE | Release | CMake build type: None Debug Release RelWithDebInfo MinSizeRel |
| INSTALL_DIR      |         | Install Prefix                                                 |
| BUILD_TOOLS      | OFF     | Build and install emulator tools                               |
| ENABLE_AUDIO     | ON      | Build with support for audio output (Requires PortAudio)       |
| ENABLE_DEBUGGER  | OFF     | Build with support for gui debugger (Requires QT4)             |
| INSTALL_DLLS     | ON      | (Windows only) Copy required DLLs when installing executable   |

Emulation of the LR35902 CPU is fairly CPU intensive. Unless you have a beefy
PC, using a build type of *Debug* will probably result in emulation framerates
that are too slow to use. If you absolutely need debug symbols, *RelWithDebInfo*
typically works at the same speed as *Release*.

## Getting started

Both the Linux and Windows version of OtterGB support input configuration files.
By default, OtterGB will attempt to load a config file named `default.cfg` which
must be placed in the same directory as the executable. The config file contains
many different emulator options that you can use to tweak performance. 

All possible emulator options are listed in the `default.cfg` file supplied with the
executable. The most important variables in the config file are **ROM_DIRECTORY** and
**ROM_FILENAME**.

**ROM_DIRECTORY** is used to specify the directory where your ROM files are placed. 
It may be a relative path or an absolute path. If the ROMs are in the same directory 
as the executable, just leave it as `.` or `./` or leave the option unspecified.

**ROM_FILENAME** specifies the file to load on boot, but you can switch it in the emulator 
console (press \` and then type `file <filename>`) or drag and drop a DMG or CGB file 
onto the emulator window to load it. If **ROM_FILENAME** is not specified or if OtterGB
fails to load the file, the emulator will boot into the OtterGB console instead. See the 
[OtterGB Console](#ottergb-console-and-lr35902-interpreter) section below for more information.

### Windows builds

The Windows version does not support command line options but instead supports system 
paths being dropped on the *.exe* file. If the extension of the dropped file is *.cfg*,
OtterGB will load it as a config file (instead of `default.cfg`), otherwise it will attempt 
to load it as a ROM file.

I get very inconsistent framerates on Windows. It seems a lot harder to do high-res
frame timing on Windows than it is on Linux (for C++ at least), although this probably
varies by machine. The framerate is even more unstable when using VSync in windowed
mode, although it works perfectly in fullscreen mode F11 and on Linux.

I think the reason for this is that high-res timing system calls take much longer on
Windows than they do on Linux for whatever reason. To alleviate this somewhat, The 
config file option **FRAME_TIME_OFFSET** may be used to tweak fps performance by modifying 
the frame timing on the microsecond level. I find an offset of around *900 us* works well 
on my PC, but you can try adjusting the offset to get framerates closer to 60. Positive
offset values will **INCREASE** the framerate while negative values will **DECREASE** it if
the emulator is running too fast.

VSync is off by default (for the reasons above), but you may enable it by changing
**VSYNC_FORCED** to *true* in the config file or by using the emulator console (press 
the ` key and type `vsync`) while the emulator is running. See the 
[OtterGB Console](#ottergb-console-and-lr35902-interpreter) section below.

### Linux builds

OtterGB may be run on Linux with or without command line arguments. The accepted
command line arguments are shown below:

| Option              | Args           | Description                                                |
|:--------------------|:--------------:|:-----------------------------------------------------------|
| --help (-h)         |                | Print command syntax                                       |
| --config (-c)       | `<filename>`   | Specify an input configuration file                        |
| --input (-i)        | `<filename>`   | Specify an input ROM file                                  |
| --framerate (-F)    | `<fps>`        | Set target framerate (default=59.73)                       |
| --volume (-V)       | `<volume>`     | Set initial output volume (in range 0 to 1)                |
| --verbose (-v)      |                | Toggle verbose output mode                                 |
| --palette (-p)      | `<palette>`    | Set palette number for DMG games (base 16)                 |
| --scale-factor (-S) | `<N>`          | Set the integer size multiplier for the screen (default 2) |
| --force-color (-C)  |                | Use CGB mode for original DMG games                        |
| --no-load-sram (-n) |                | Do not load external cartridge RAM (SRAM) at boot          |
| --debug (-d)        |                | Enable debugging support                                   |
| --tile-viewer (-T)  |                | Enable VRAM tile viewer (if debug gui enabled)             |
| --layer-viewer (-L) |                | Enable BG/WIN layer viewer (if debug gui enabled)          |

The `-c` flag allows the use of a config file just as is used for Windows, but many
config file options are duplicated with command line options and the command flags
take priority.

If a config file is not used (with the `-c` flag), the input filename must be
specified, otherwise the program will boot to the console.

### Using bootstrap ROMs

OtterGB supports custom bootstrap ROMs on startup. Bootstraps have a maximum 
length of 16 kB and must contain compiled LR35902 code. They must also contain 
no vital code between addresses 0x100 and 0x200 (byte numbers 256 to 512) because
the cartridge ROM header needs to be visible to the emulator. Bootstrap program
entry point must be byte 0, although you could use a `JP` at byte 0 to jump to the
start of the program.

By default, bootstrap programs are expected to exist in a subdirectory named 
`./bootstraps/` which must be placed in the same directory as the executable in
order to function. The expected filenames for the DMG and CGB bootstrap ROMs
are `dmg_boot.bin` and `cgb_boot.bin` respectively. If OtterGB fails to locate
the bootstrap ROMs, it will simply ignore them and start the input ROM immediately.

The standard DMG and CGB bootstrap ROMs are not included with OtterGB because
they contain potentially copyrighted material, but you can find them online.

## Running ROMs

While the emulator is running, press ESC to exit and press F1 for default button
mapping. Default game controls are shown below, but they may be changed using the
config file.

### DMG / CGB button inputs:

| Button | Keyboard Key |
|-------:|:-------------|
|  Start | Enter        |
| Select | Tab          |
|      B | j            |
|      A | k            |
|     Up | w (up)       |
|   Down | s (down)     |
|   Left | a (left)     |
|  Right | d (right)    |

### System functions:

| Key | Function |
|----:|:---------|
| F1  | Display help screen |
| F2  | Pause emulation     |
| F3  | Resume emulation    |
| F4  | Reset emulator      |
| F5  | Quicksave state     |
| F6  | Decrease frame-skip (higher CPU usage) |
| F7  | Increase frame-skip (lower CPU usage)  |
| F8  | Save cart SRAM to `sram.dat`        |
| F9  | Quickload state                     |
| F10 | Start/stop midi recording `out.mid` |
| F11 | Enable/disable full screen mode |
| F12 | Take screenshot                 |
| \`  | Open interpreter console        |
| -   | Decrease volume                 |
| +   | Increase volume                 |
| c   | Change currently active gamepad |
| f   | Show/hide FPS counter on screen |
| m   | Mute output audio               |

### Controller support

OtterGB supports 360-style and PS-style controllers. Simply plug in a controller
and start using it using the default mapping below (bindings may be changed using
the config file).

| Button | Controller Button |
|-------:|:------------------|
| Start  | Start             |
| Select | Back              |
|      B | A (or X)          |
|      A | B (or O)          |
|     Up | DPad up           |
|   Down | DPad down         |
|   Left | DPad left         |
|  Right | DPad right        |

Press [GUIDE/HOME] to pause emulation (does not work on all platforms because some
bind the guide button to an on-screen menu e.g. Windows).

### Fullscreen and windowed modes

Upon booting, OtterGB starts in windowed mode. The window may be resized to any size
you wish. Pillarboxing or letterboxing will be added for windows with an aspect ratio
that does not match that of the DMG / CGB (1.111). Pillar[letter]boxing may be 
disabled by setting **UNLOCK_ASPECT_RATIO** to *true*.

OtterGB will automatically pause emulation whenever the window loses focus, and will
resume emulation when it regains focus.

To switch to fullscreen mode, press F11 at any time. VSync is automatically enabled
when in fullscreen mode, regardless of previous settings, but you may disable it from
the [console](#ottergb-console-and-lr35902-interpreter). Pressing F11 again will return 
to windowed mode.

### Save RAM

OtterGB supports saving and loading of cartridge save ram (SRAM) for ROMs which
support this feature. By default, SRAM is loaded automatically when the ROM is
loaded (using the filename of the ROM, if it exists) and it is saved automatically 
when the emulator is closed. If the emulator crashes, SRAM may not save successfully.
To avoid potential loss of save data, SRAM may be saved at any time by pressing F8.

### Savestates

Savestates are supported by OtterGB, but are currently still in development and may
be buggy. They are not guaranteed to work properly and their format is subject to 
change in future updates. Pressing F5 will save the current emulator state and 
pressing F9 will load the saved state. This feature usually works, but sometimes 
the emulator will hang and will need to be reset by pressing F4.

### Screenshots

Screenshots may be saved at any time by pressing F12. Screenshots will be saved
in the same directory as the executable and will have the game title, the date,
and the time in the filename. Currently only BMP output is supported, but this
will be changed to PNG in the future.

### Midi output

OtterGB supports recording midi files. Press F10 while the emulator is running
to start a midi recording and then press F10 again to finalize the output midi
file. Currently, midi files will always have the name 'out.mid' so be sure to
back up midi files if you plan to record more than one.

Midi file recording works fairly well, but may not produce pleasant sounding
midi files if the ROM being recorded makes heavy use of the frequency sweep on
channel 1 or if it changes note frequency very rapidly.

## OtterGB console and LR35902 interpreter

OtterGB contains a built in console and LR35902 interpreter. To enable the console,
press \` at any time while the emulator is running. The console supports many
built-in commands as well as allowing direct read/write access to all CPU registers,
system registers, and all 64 kB of system memory.

All CPU and system registers may be used by name in mathematical expressions. The 8
8-bit LR35902 CPU registers are *a*, *b*, *c*, *d*, *e*, *f*, *h*, and *l*. The 6 16-bit 
registers are *ab*, *cd*, *ef*, *hl*, *sp*, and *pc* (*sp* and *pc* are the stack pointer 
and program counter respectively). System registers are 8-bit values and may be used by 
their standardized names (e.g. *LCDC*, *NR10*, etc; not case sensitive).

There are no sanity checks used in the console. You can read or write any register
or memory location you want. You can also do something stupid like change the program
counter or stack pointer, although these will almost certainly hang the current ROM.

If you crash the ROM while playing around you can reset it by typing *reset* in the
console or by pressing F4 outside the console.

The following built-in commands are available:

| Command       | Args           | Description          |
|:--------------|:--------------:|:---------------------|
| quit          |                | Exit emulator        |
| exit          |                | Exit emulator        |
| close         |                | Close console        |
| help          | [command]      | Print list of commands or syntax for *command* |
| about         |                | Print program information |
| a             | [value]        | Print or set *A* register |
| b             | [value]        | Print or set *B* register |
| c             | [value]        | Print or set *C* register |
| d             | [value]        | Print or set *D* register |
| e             | [value]        | Print or set *E* register |
| f             | [value]        | Print or set *F* register |
| h             | [value]        | Print or set *H* register |
| l             | [value]        | Print or set *L* register |
| d8            | [value]        | Print or set *d8* immediate |
| af            | [value]        | Print or set *AF* register |
| bc            | [value]        | Print or set *BC* register |
| de            | [value]        | Print or set *DE* register |
| hl            | [value]        | Print or set *HL* register |
| pc            | [value]        | Print or set program counter *PC* |
| sp            | [value]        | Print or set stack pointer *SP*   |
| d16           | [value]        | Print or set *d16* immediate      |
| inst          |                | Print most recent cpu instruction |
| read          | `<addr>`         | Read byte at address     |
| write         | `<addr> <value>` | Write byte to address    |
| rreg          | `<name>`         | Read system register     |
| wreg          | `<name> <value>` | Write system register    |
| hex           | `<value>`        | Convert value to hex     |
| bin           | `<value>`        | Convert value to binary  |
| dec           | `<value>`        | Convert value to decimal |
| cls           |                | Clear screen   |
| reset         |                | Reset emulator |
| qsave         | [filename]     | Quicksave      |
| qload         | [filename]     | Quickload      |
| dir           | [path]         | Set ROM directory (or print if no argument) |
| file          | [filename]     | Set ROM filename (or print if no argument)  |
| vsync         |                | Toggle VSync on or off                      |
